VMO - Using DataVolumes guide (#1918)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/vm-management/create-manage-vm/using-datavolumes.md

---

> sidebar_label: "Using DataVolumes for disk templates"
> title: "Using DataVolumes for disk templates"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: "Create disk templates"
title: "Create disk templates"
```

description: "Using DataVolumes to quickly create VMs from template disks in Palette Virtual Machine Orchestrator"
icon: " "
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 20
tags: ["vmo"]
---

When VMs are deployed from template, they almost always include a disk template containing a preinstalled copy of the desired OS. The Kubevirt CDI is used to import these templates through a concept called [Data Volumes](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/doc/datavolumes.md) and it supports multiple different approaches to do so. Some approaches are vastly quicker than others though. Hence, designing this correctly is important. This page details how to do that.

## Overview

![Image cloning with CDI](/cdi-disk-clone.png)

> The diagram above is a representation of best approach:

Author: I don't own this diagram, I got it from the web as a picture. Turning the 4 steps into diagram becomes messy because it would be 4 boxes that all reference other things. It would get just as wordy as the text below.

> The diagram above is a representation of best approach:

Author: I adjusted the wording a bit

1. Create a `DataVolume` resource to import an external disk image into the cluster, saving it as a template PVC on the cluster
2. Configure a `vmTemplate` resource to clone the template PVC into a new PVC for use by the VM. This is also achieved through a `DataVolume` specification, but this time inside the VM specification.
3. Set up RBAC permissions within the cluster to ensure Data Volumes can be used across namespaces.
4. Define `StorageProfile` resources to ensure Kubevirt CDI uses the CSI-assisted cloning technique instead of any slower alternatives.

<br />

> ## Implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create templates
```

The following reference implementation details the recommended approach to implementing the components mentioned above. Version 4.2.0 and higher of the VMO pack contain native support for this approach:
* Template disks will be imported into the `vmo-golden-images` namespace
* The `default` and `virtual-machines` namespaces will be configured with RBAC permissions required for cloning DataVolumes from the `vmo-golden-images` namespace
* `vmTemplate` resources will use a `dataVolumeTemplates` section that clones the template disk from the `vmo-golden-images` namespace

<br />

> ### Importing disk images as templates

Author: Adjusted the headings

> The following manifest can be added to a manifest layer in a Palette cluster profile to define a `DataVolume` that imports the example disk template for Ubuntu 22.04 into the `vmo-golden-images` namespace:

Reviewer: Can you provide the cluster profile to add this manifest to?  This will make it easier for the learner to follow along and reproduce the steps in your tutorial.

```
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: DataVolume
metadata:
  name: "template-ubuntu-2204"
  namespace: "vmo-golden-images"
  annotations:
    cdi.kubevirt.io/storage.deleteAfterCompletion: "false"
spec:
  storage:
    accessModes:
      - ReadWriteMany
    resources:
      requests:
        storage: 50Gi
    volumeMode: Block      # or "Filesystem", depending on the CSI used
  source:
    registry:
      url: "docker://gcr.io/spectro-images-public/release/vm-dashboard/os/ubuntu-container-disk:22.04"
```

Possible `source` options are described in the [CDI DataVolumes documentation](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/doc/datavolumes.md#source). The example above uses the `registry` source to import the data from a container disk on an external Docker registry.

> Note 2 important aspects of this DataVolume:

Reviewer: According to our [style guide](https://spectrocloud.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DE/pages/1765933057/Spectro+Cloud+Internal+Style+Guide#Numbers), spell out single digit numbers.

:::

As soon as the `DataVolume` resource above is applied to the cluster, the CDI will begin importing the data into the target PVC in the `vmo-golden-images` namespace. The target PVC will have the same name as the `DataVolume` object.

<br />

### Creating vmTemplates with CSI-assisted cloning

The next step is to create a `vmTemplate` resource that clones the PVC in the `vmo-golden-images` namespace. This is done through the `dataVolumeTemplates` section:

```
apiVersion: spectrocloud.com/v1
kind: VmTemplate
metadata:
  name: ubuntu-2204
spec:
  dataVolumeTemplates:
    - metadata:
        name: ubuntu-2204
      spec:
        source:
          pvc: 
            name: template-ubuntu-2204
            namespace: vmo-golden-images
        pvc:
          accessModes:
            - ReadWriteMany
          resources:
            requests:
              storage: 50Gi
          volumeMode: Block      # or "Filesystem", depending on the CSI used
  template:

>     < rest of template >

Reviewer: Please provide the rest of the template so that learners can copy this. The code preview box will limit how many lines will be displayed and create a scrollbar.

```

The `spec.dataVolumeTemplates.spec` section defines which source PVC to clone and what PVC to clone into. In the example above, the `source` section points to the `template-ubuntu-2204` PVC in the `vmo-golden-images` namespace. The `pvc` section creates a new target PVC with the specified `accessMode` and `volumeMode` characteristics. The size of the new PVC must be the same or larger as the source PVC.

:::info

> To allow CSI-assisted cloning to work, there are a few [prerequisites](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/doc/csi-cloning.md#prerequisites) that must be followed. Most importantly, the source and target PVC must share the same Storage Class and the same Volume Mode. If the requirements are not met, CDI will automatically fallback to the slower host-assisted cloning.

Reviewer: Please add these prerequisites to the newly created `Prerequisites` section.

> To enable CSI-assisted cloning into larger PVCs than the source PVC, the Storage Class used must have `allowVolumeExpansion` set to `true`.

Reviewer: Where is this `allowVolumeExpansion` setting? I don't see it in any of your manifests.

:::

<br />

> ### Setting up RBAC permissions for cloning across namespaces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Set up RBAC permissions
```

When the CDI performs a cloning operation, it runs under the `default` serviceaccount in the namespace of the target PVC. When the source PVC is in a different namespace, required permissions must be given to the serviceaccount. Version 4.2.0 of the VMO pack does this automatically, you can specify the namespaces for which the permissions are configured through the `vmEnabledNamespaces` option in the pack:

```
charts:
  virtual-machine-orchestrator:

    # This namespace will be used to store golden images
    goldenImagesNamespace: "vmo-golden-images"

    # These namespaces will be created and set up to deploy VMs into
    vmEnabledNamespaces:
      - "default"
      - "virtual-machines"
```

<br />

> ### Defining StorageProfiles to ensure CSI-assisted cloning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Define StorageProfiles
```

> While the CDI contains an internal database of CSIs and their supported access modes, volume modes and CSI-assisted cloning support, it is still recommended to create a `StorageProfile` to force these parameters to what we want them to be. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the CDI contains an internal database of CSIs and their supported access modes, volume modes and CSI-assisted cloning support, we recommend creating a `StorageProfile` to force these parameters to their desired values, as follows.
```

Reviewer: We use [active voice](https://spectrocloud.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DE/pages/1765933057/Spectro+Cloud+Internal+Style+Guide#Active-voice) and the first plural for recommendations.

```
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: StorageProfile
metadata:
  name: ceph-block
spec:
  claimPropertySets: 
  - accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
    volumeMode: 
      Block
  cloneStrategy: csi-clone
```

> The example above informs CDI that a Storage Class with the name `ceph-block` supports the `Block` volumeMode with the ReadWriteMany accessMode, and it should use `csi-clone` for cloning operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example above informs CDI that a Storage Class with the name `ceph-block` supports the `Block` volumeMode with the `ReadWriteMany` accessMode, and it should use `csi-clone` for cloning operations.
```

More information about Storage Profiles is available in the [CDI documentation](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/doc/storageprofile.md).

:::info

> If Storage Profiles are not manually defined, CDI will automatically generate one for every Storage Class, based on the information in its internal database. It is recommend to verify these parameters are accurate for use case and if not, overwrite them by defining the Storage Profile manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Storage Profiles are not manually defined, CDI will automatically generate one for every Storage Class, based on the information in its internal database. We recommend verifying these parameters are accurate for your use-case and if not, overwrite them by defining the Storage Profile manually.
```

:::

> When Storage Profiles are properly defined, you can optionally replace the target `pvc` sections in your `vmTemplate` resources with a `storage` section as noted in the [CDI documentation](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/doc/datavolumes.md#storage):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Storage Profiles are defined, you can optionally replace the target `pvc` sections in your `vmTemplate` resources with a `storage` section as noted in the [CDI documentation](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/doc/datavolumes.md#storage).
```

```
apiVersion: spectrocloud.com/v1
kind: VmTemplate
metadata:
  name: ubuntu-2204
spec:
  dataVolumeTemplates:
    - metadata:
        name: ubuntu-2204
      spec:
        source:
          pvc: 
            name: template-ubuntu-2204
            namespace: vmo-golden-images
        storage:
          resources:
            requests:
              storage: 50Gi
  template:

>     < rest of template >

Reviewer: Please provide the rest of the template so that learners can copy this. The code preview box will limit how many lines will be displayed and create a scrollbar.

```

> Using `storage` instead of `pvc` will automatically discover default values for `accessModes`, `volumeMode` and optionally even the size from the source PVC and its associated Storage Profile. One benefit of `storage` over `pvc` is that the CDI will automatically calculate the size overhead for `Filesystem` mode Storage Classes, allowing the VM template to use the original disk size instead of one adjusted for the filesystem overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `storage` instead of `pvc` to automatically discover default values for `accessModes`, `volumeMode` and optionally even the size from the source PVC and its associated Storage Profile. One benefit of `storage` over `pvc` is that the CDI will automatically calculate the size overhead for `Filesystem` mode Storage Classes, allowing the VM template to use the original disk size instead of one adjusted for the filesystem overhead.

## Cleanup

// Directions to delete resources created during this tutorial

## Wrap-Up

// Summary for the learner
```

Reviewer: I have added the last 2 sections of our tutorials template to round off on.

    :::

3.  When the CDI performs a cloning operation, it runs under the `default` service account in the namespace of the
    target PVC. When the source PVC is in a different namespace, required permissions must be given to the service
    account. The [VMO pack](../vm-management.md) version 4.2.0 does this automatically through its default charts
    specification. This configuration uses the `vmEnabledNamespaces` option to specify the namespaces for which the
    permissions are configured.

    <br />

    ```yaml {8}
    charts:
      virtual-machine-orchestrator:
        # This namespace will be used to store golden images
        goldenImagesNamespace: "vmo-golden-images"

        # These namespaces will be created and set up to deploy VMs into
        vmEnabledNamespaces:
          - "default"
          - "virtual-machines"
    ```

4.  The CDI contains an internal database of CSIs, the CSI supported access modes, volume modes and CSI-assisted cloning
    support. However, it is still recommended to create a `StorageProfile` to force these parameters to your desired
    values.

    Add the following code snippet in another manifest file in the same cluster profile.

>     This snippet has three notable configurations for the storage class it defines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This snippet has three notable configurations that define the storage class.
```

    in the CDI documentation contains more information about storage profiles.

    If Storage Profiles are not manually defined, the CDI will automatically generate one for every Storage Class, based
    on the information in its internal database. It is recommend to verify these parameters are accurate for your use
    case and if not, overwrite them by defining the Storage Profile manually.

    As noted in the
    [CDI documentation](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/doc/datavolumes.md#storage),
    you can optionally replace the target `pvc` sections in your `vmTemplate` resources with a `storage` section once
    you have defined a storage profile.

    Using storage instead of PVC will automatically discover default values for `accessMode`, `volumeMode` and
    optionally even the size from the source PVC and its associated storage profile.

    A benefit of `storage` over `pvc` is that the CDI will automatically calculate the size overhead for `Filesystem`
    mode storage classes, allowing the VM template to use the original disk size instead of one adjusted for the
    filesystem overhead.

>     If you want to use this template, replace the contents of the second manifest with the following snippet.

Reviewer 2: This steps feels a bit confusing to me. It doesn't follow as part of the existing procedure, but instead offers an alternative to the information provided in step two (I think? not sure if that's where the second manifest is). Let's discuss it and see if we can move it closer to the manifest it suggests updating?

Reviewer: Yes it's an alternative to step 2 but it requires step 4.

Reviewer: Perhaps I could move step 2 down instead?

Reviewer 2: If the order of operation doesn't matter here, then maybe moving step 2 down would make more sense. This way, you can clearly identify this info as an alternative

Reviewer: Added the details like we said.

              disks:
                - disk:
                    bus: virtio
                  name: datavolume-os
                - disk:
                    bus: virtio
                  name: cloudinitdisk
              interfaces:
                - masquerade: {}
                  name: default
                  model: virtio
            machine:
              type: q35
            resources:
              limits:
                memory: 2Gi
              requests:
                memory: 2Gi
          networks:
            - name: default
              pod: {}
          volumes:
            - dataVolume:
                name: ubuntu-2204
              name: datavolume-os
            - cloudInitNoCloud:
                userData: |
                  #cloud-config
                  ssh_pwauth: True
                  chpasswd: { expire: False }
                  password: spectro
                  disable_root: false
                  runcmd:
                    - apt-get update
                    - apt-get install -y qemu-guest-agent
                    - systemctl start qemu-guest-agent
              name: cloudinitdisk
    ```

6.  Click on **Confirm & Create**.

> 7.  Complete cluster profile configuration and click on **Finish Configuration**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7.  Complete the cluster profile configuration and click on **Finish Configuration**.
```

## Validate

1.  Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and select **Clusters**.

> 2.  Select your cluster and view its **Overview** tab. Select the **Profile** tab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2.  Select your cluster and click the **Profile** tab.
```

Reviewer 2: I'd remove `and view its **Overview** tab`, since it doesn't seem to relate to the actual validation step

              type: q35
            resources:
              limits:
                memory: 2Gi
              requests:
                memory: 2Gi
          networks:
            - name: default
              pod: {}
          volumes:
            - dataVolume:
                name: ubuntu-2204
              name: datavolume-os
            - cloudInitNoCloud:
                userData: |
                  #cloud-config
                  ssh_pwauth: True
                  chpasswd: { expire: False }
                  password: spectro
                  disable_root: false
                  runcmd:
                    - apt-get update
                    - apt-get install -y qemu-guest-agent
                    - systemctl start qemu-guest-agent
              name: cloudinitdisk
    ```

    :::tip

    To enable CSI-assisted cloning into larger PVCs than the source PVC, set `allowVolumeExpansion : true` on your
    defined Storage Class.

    :::

3.  When the CDI clones a PVC, it runs under the `default` service account in the namespace of the target PVC. When the
    source PVC is in a different namespace, you must give the required permissions to the service account. The

>     [VMO pack](../vm-management.md) version 4.2.0 does this automatically through its default charts specification. This

Author: ```suggestion
    [VMO pack](../vm-management.md) version 4.2.0 (or higher) does this automatically through its default charts specification. This
```

        goldenImagesNamespace: "vmo-golden-images"

        # These namespaces will be created and set up to deploy VMs into
        vmEnabledNamespaces:
          - "default"
          - "virtual-machines"
    ```

4.  By default, the CDI contains an internal database of CSIs, with the CSI supported access modes, volume modes, and
    CSI-assisted cloning support. However, we recommend creating a `StorageProfile` to adjust these parameters to your
    desired values.

    Create another manifest in this cluster profile and add the following code snippet.

    This snippet has three notable configurations that define the storage class.

    - The storage class has the name `ceph-block`.
    - The storage class supports the `Block` volume mode with the `ReadWriteMany` access mode.
    - The storage class uses `csi-clone` for cloning operations.

    <br />

    ```yaml {4,8,10,11}
    apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
    kind: StorageProfile
    metadata:
      name: ceph-block
    spec:
      claimPropertySets:
        - accessModes:
            - ReadWriteMany
          volumeMode: Block
      cloneStrategy: csi-clone
    ```

>     Expand the following section to review how to use storage profiles for CSI-assisted cloning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Expand the following section to learn how you can use storage profiles for CSI-assisted cloning.
```

Reviewer 2: It feels more like we're introducing new info here, so I'd go with learn

    <details>

    <summary>Storage Profiles in VM Templates</summary>

>     If Storage Profiles are not manually defined, the CDI will automatically generate one for every Storage Class, based
>     on the information in its internal database. It is recommend to verify these parameters are accurate for your use
>     case and if not, overwrite them by defining the Storage Profile manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If Storage Profiles are not manually defined, the CDI will automatically generate one for every Storage Class based
    on the information in its internal database. We recommend verifying that these parameters are accurate for your use
    case and, if not, overwriting them to define a Storage Profile manually.
```

>     As noted in the
>     [CDI documentation](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/doc/datavolumes.md#storage),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Per the
    [CDI documentation](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/doc/datavolumes.md#storage),
```

    you can optionally replace the target `pvc` sections in your `vmTemplate` resources with a `storage` section once
    you have defined a storage profile.

>     Using storage instead of PVC will automatically discover default values for `accessMode`, `volumeMode` and
>     optionally even the size from the source PVC and its associated storage profile.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Using storage instead of PVC will automatically discover default values for `accessMode`, `volumeMode` and,
    optionally, even the size from the source PVC and its associated storage profile.
```

    A benefit of `storage` over `pvc` is that the CDI will automatically calculate the size overhead for `Filesystem`

>     mode storage classes, allowing the VM template to use the original disk size instead of one adjusted for the
>     filesystem overhead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    mode storage classes, allowing the VM template to use the original disk size instead of the one adjusted for the
    filesystem overhead.
```
